In the courtyard stands an old woman holding in her hands a clock. I walk past the old woman, stop and ask her: “What time is it?”

“Take a look,” says the old woman.

I look and see that the clock has no hands.

“There are no hands there,” I say.

The old woman looks at the clock face and says to me:

“It’s quarter to three.”

“So, that’s how it is? Thanks very much,” I say and leave.

The old woman yells something at my back, but I walk on without looking around. I go out onto the street and walk on the sunny side. The spring sun is very pleasant. I walk on, squinting and smoking my pipe. On the corner of Sadovaya I happen upon Sakerdon Mikhailovich walking towards me. We greet each other, stop and talk for a long while. I get bored of standing out on the street and invite Sakerdon Mikhailovich into a cellar. We drink vodka, chasing it with hard-boiled eggs and sprats, then say our goodbyes, and I go on alone.

Then I suddenly remember that I’ve forgotten to turn off the electric stove at home. I’m very upset. I turn around and walk home. The day began so well, and already the first bad turn. I should not have gone outside.

I come home, take off my jacket, take my watch out of my vest pocket and hang it up on the nail; then I lock the door and lie down on the sofa. I’ll lie here and try to fall asleep.

From the street I can hear the unpleasant screams of little boys. I lie there dreaming up tortures for them. Most of all I like the idea of afflicting them with tetanus so that they’d suddenly stop moving. Their parents drag them back to their respective homes. They lie in their little beds and can’t even eat, because their mouths don’t open. They are nourished artificially. After a week the tetanus goes away, but the children are so weak that they still have to be confined to their beds for a whole month more. Then, bit by bit, they begin to recover, but I afflict them with a second bout of tetanus and they all expire.

I lie on the sofa with my eyes open and can’t fall asleep. I recall the old woman with the clock that I saw today in the yard, and it pleases me that her clock had no hands. Just the other day at the pawn shop I saw the most hideous kitchen clock and the hands were made in the form of a knife and a fork.

My God! but I haven’t yet turned off the electric stove! I jump up and turn it off, then lie down again on the sofa and try to fall asleep. I close my eyes. I’m not sleepy. In the window the spring sun shines right down on me. I get hot. I get up and sit down in the armchair by the window.

Now I’m sleepy, but I will not sleep. I will take paper and pen and I will write. I sense an awful strength within me. I thought everything over yesterday already. It will be a story about a miracle worker who lives in our time and does not work miracles. He knows he is a miracle worker and could create any sort of miracle, but he does not do it. He is evicted from his apartment—he knows that were he to just wave a finger the apartment would stay his, but he does not do it; he timidly vacates his apartment and lives outside of town in a shed. He can turn this old shed into a wonderful brick house, but he does not do it; he continues to live in the shed and in the end he dies, not having worked a single miracle in all his life.

I sit and wring my hands with joy. Sakerdon Mikhailovich will explode with envy. He thinks that I’m no longer capable of writing a thing of genius. Quickly, quickly, to work! Away with any sleep and laziness! I will write for eighteen hours straight!

I shiver all over with anticipation. I can’t figure out what I should do: I needed to take pen and paper, but I grabbed various objects, not at all the ones that I needed. I ran about the room from the window to the desk, from the desk to the stove, from the stove to the desk again, and then to the couch and again to the window. I couldn’t breathe from the fire that raged in my chest. It’s only five o’clock yet. The whole day is ahead, and the evening, and all of the night.

I stand in the middle of the room. What am I thinking? It’s already twenty past five. I have to write. I push the little table up to the window and sit down at it. In front of me is the graph paper; in my hand, the pen.

My heart is still pounding too hard and my hand shakes. I wait to settle down. I put down the pen and fill my pipe. The sun is shining right in my eyes; I squint and light my pipe.

Now a crow flies past the window. I look out the window and see a man on the sidewalk with a mechanical leg. He’s knocking loudly with his leg and his cane.

“So …” I say to myself as I continue looking out the window.

The sun hides behind the chimney of the apartment house standing opposite. The shadow cast by the chimney runs along the roof then flies across the street and falls across my face. I ought to take advantage of this shadow and write a few words about the miracle worker. I grab the pen and write:

The miracle worker was tall.

I can’t write anything more. I sit until the moment I start experiencing hunger. Then I stand up and go over to the small cupboard where my provisions are kept. I feel around in there but find nothing. A cube of sugar and nothing more.

Someone’s knocking at the door.

“Who is it?”

No one answers me. I open the door and before me I see the old woman who this morning was standing in the courtyard with the clock. I’m very surprised and can’t say a thing.

“And here I am,” says the old woman and walks into my room.

I stand at the door and don’t know what to do—boot her out or, on the contrary, offer her a seat? But the old woman walks over to my armchair by the window and sits down herself.

“Close the door, and lock it,” the old woman tells me.

I close and lock the door.

“Get down on your knees,” says the old woman.

And I get down on my knees.

But here I begin to understand the complete awkwardness of my situation. Why am I standing on my knees before some old woman? And why is this old woman in my room sitting in my favorite chair? Why did I not throw this old woman out?

“Listen up,” I say, “what right do you have giving orders in my room, and moreover ordering me around? I have no desire to stand on my knees.”

“And you don’t have to,” says the old woman. “Now you must lie down on your stomach and stick your face in the floor.”

I instantly fulfill her command.

Directly in front of me I see precisely drafted squares. Pain in my shoulder and in my right hip forces me to change my position. I was lying face down; now with great difficulty I get up onto my knees. All my members had fallen asleep; they bend poorly. I look around and see myself in my room standing on my knees in the middle of the floor. Consciousness and memory slowly come back to me. I look around the room again and see that on the chair by the window someone is sitting. It’s not very light in the room, probably because it’s white nights. My gaze is fixed. My God! Can it really be the old woman sitting in my armchair still? I crane my neck and look. Yes, of course, it’s the old woman, and she’s dropped her head onto her chest. She must have fallen asleep. I get up and, limping, approach her. The old woman’s head droops on her chest, her arms hang by the sides of the chair. I want to grab this old woman and push her out the door.

“Listen to me,” I say, “you are in my room. I need to work. I’m asking you to leave.”

The old woman doesn’t budge. I bend down and peer into the old woman’s face. Her mouth is slightly open and jutting out of her mouth are the false teeth that must have come loose. And suddenly everything becomes clear to me: The old woman is dead.

A terrible feeling of irritation overtakes me. What for did the old woman die in my room? I can’t stand dead people. And now fuss over this carrion, go talk to the janitor and the building super and explain to them why this old woman turned up at my place. I look at the old woman with loathing. But what if, maybe, she’s not dead? I feel her forehead. It’s cold. Her hand also. Well, what am I to do?

I light up my pipe and sit down on the sofa. A mad anger swells up inside me.

“What a scumbag!” I say out loud.

The dead old woman sits like a sack in my armchair. The teeth jut out of her mouth. She resembles a dead horse.

“A disgusting scene,” I say, but I can’t cover the old woman with a newspaper because who knows what might happen under a newspaper.

Behind the wall I can hear movement: That’s my neighbor getting up, a train engine driver. That’s just what I need, for him to sniff out that I’ve got a dead old woman sitting in my room! I listen closely to the steps of my neighbor. What’s taking him so long? It’s already half past five! It’s long time for him to be going. Oh my God! He’s fixing to have tea! I can hear the primus stove making noise behind the wall. Ack, if that cursed engine driver would just hurry up and leave!

I pull my legs up onto the sofa and lie there. Eight minutes go by, but the neighbor’s tea still isn’t ready and the primus stove is hissing. I close my eyes and nap.

I dream that my neighbor has gone and I go out, at the same time as he, onto the landing and slam the door with the spring lock behind me. I don’t have a key and I can’t get back into the apartment. I have to buzz and wake the rest of the tenants, and that’s real bad. I stand on the landing thinking what I should do, and suddenly I notice that I have no hands. I tilt my head to get a better look if I have hands or not, and I see that on one side instead of a hand a table knife juts out, and on the other side, a fork.

“There now,” I say to Sakerdon Mikhailovich, who’s sitting for some reason right nearby on a folding chair. “You see,” I say to him, “what kind of hands I’ve got.”

But Sakerdon Mikhailovich sits silently, and I realize that it’s not the real Sakerdon Mikhailovich, but a clay one.

Then I wake up and it dawns on me that I’m lying in my room on the sofa and that at the window in the armchair is the dead old woman.

I quickly turn my head towards her. The old woman is not in the armchair. I gaze at the empty armchair and I am filled with wild joy. That means it was all a dream. Only, where did it begin? Did the old woman come into my room yesterday evening? Perhaps that was also a dream? I came back home yesterday because I’d forgotten to turn off the electric stove. But maybe that was also a dream? Either way, how great is it that there is no dead old woman in my room and I don’t have to go to the building super and fuss with the corpse!

But wait, how long have I been asleep? I looked at the clock—half past nine, must be morning.

God! What doesn’t happen in dreams!

I dropped my feet down off the sofa about to stand up, when suddenly I saw the dead old woman lying on the floor behind the table by the chair. She was lying there face up and the dentures that had fallen out of her mouth bit into her nostril with one tooth. The arms were turned under the torso and were not visible, and bony legs in white, dirty wool stockings stuck out from under her hiked-up skirt.

“Scumbag!” I yelled and, running up to the old woman, kicked her in the chin with my boot.

Her dentures flew off into the corner. I wanted to hit the old woman a second time, but hesitated to leave marks on the body, or else they’d later decide that it was me who killed her.

I backed away from the old woman, sat down on the sofa and lit up my pipe. About twenty minutes passed like that. Now it was clear to me that no matter what, the case would be transferred to criminal investigation and the pea brain detective would charge me with murder. The situation was turning out to be serious, and then there was the boot to the chin on top of it all.

I walked up to the old woman again, bent down and started examining her face. There was a small dark spot on the chin. No, they couldn’t raise a stink about that. So what? Maybe the old woman banged herself on something or other while she was still alive? I calm down a little and start to pace the room, smoking my pipe and mulling over my situation.

I’m walking around and around the room, and I start feeling my hunger more and more. I even start shivering from hunger. Again I fumble around in the little cupboard where my provisions are kept, but find nothing except for the piece of sugar.

I take out my wallet and count the money. Eleven rubles. That means I can buy myself some ham and bread and there’ll still be some left over for tobacco.

I straighten my tie which had gotten beaten out of shape over the course of the night. I take my watch, put on my jacket, walk out into the hall, thoroughly lock the door to my room, put the key in my pocket and walk outside. First I must eat, then my thoughts will be clearer and I will undertake some kind of action with this carrion.

On the way to the store I get this idea: Why not drop in on Sakerdon Mikhailovich and tell him everything, maybe together we can come up with something sooner. But right away I reject this idea because some things must be done alone, without witnesses.

There was no ham at the store so I bought myself half a kilogram of sausage links. There was no tobacco either. From the store I went straight to the bakery.

At the bakery there was a big crowd and a long line formed for the cashier. I made a face but got in line anyway. The line moved very slowly and then stopped completely because some sort of scene had occurred at the cash register.

I made a face as though I knew nothing about it and gazed into the back of a young little lady who was standing in line ahead of me. The young little lady was obviously very curious: She craned her little neck right and left and once a minute she would get up on her tippy-toes to get a better look at what was going on at the register. Finally she turned to me and asked:

“Do you know what’s going on over there?”

“Sorry, I don’t,” I said as dryly as possible.

The little lady spun around in all directions and finally again addressed me:

“Do you think you could go and find out what’s going on over there?”

“I’m sorry, I’m not in the least interested,” said I, even more dryly.

“It doesn’t interest you?” exclaimed the little lady. “But you’re being held up in the line because of it too.”

I did not reply and only bowed slightly. The little lady looked me over carefully.

“Of course it’s not a man’s business to stand in line for bread,” she said. “I feel bad for you—you have to stand here. You must be a bachelor?”

“Yes, I’m a bachelor!” I replied, a bit confused, but continuing by inertia to answer rather dryly and with that bowing slightly.

Once more the little lady looked me over from head to toe and suddenly, stretching her finger out toward my sleeve, said:

“How about I buy what you need and you wait for me outside.”

I was at a complete loss.

“I’m grateful to you,” I said. “It’s very kind of you, but, really, I could do it myself.”

“No, no,” said the little lady, “go on outside. What were you going to buy?”

“You see,” said I, “I was going to buy half a kilo of black bread, but only the form-baked loaf, the one that’s cheaper. I like it better.”

“Well, there now, that’s good,” said the little lady. “And now on your way. I’ll buy it and we’ll settle up after.”

And she even pushed me a little under the elbow.

I walk out of the bakery and stand right by the door. The spring sun shines right in my face. I light up my pipe. What a kind little lady! It’s so rare nowadays. I stand there squinting from the sunlight, smoking my pipe, and think about the kind little lady. She does have light brown eyes. Simply marvelous how nice looking she is!

“You smoke a pipe?” I hear a voice near me. The kind little lady extends the bread to me.

“Oh, I’m eternally grateful to you,” I say, taking the bread.

“And you smoke a pipe! I like that terribly,” says the kind little lady.

And between us occurs the following conversation:

SHE: I take it you go for bread yourself?

I: Not only for bread; I buy everything for myself.

SHE: And where do you dine?

I: Ordinarily I cook dinner for myself. And sometimes I eat at the pub.

SHE: You like beer?

I: No, I like vodka better.

SHE: I like vodka too.

I: You like vodka? How excellent! I would like to have a drink together with you sometime.

SHE: And I too would like to drink vodka with you.

I: I’m sorry, but can I ask you about one thing?

SHE (blushing heavily): Of course, ask away.

I: Alright, I’ll ask you. Do you believe in God?

SHE (surprised): In God? Yes, of course.

I: And what would you say if we were to buy some vodka now and go to my place. I live not far from here.

SHE (keenly): Well then, I accept.

I: Then let’s go.

We walk into a store and I buy half a liter of vodka. I don’t have any more money, only some measly change. We’re talking about different things all the time, and I suddenly remember that in my room, on the floor, is a dead old woman.

I look back at my new acquaintance—she’s standing at a counter and looking at jars of jam. I carefully make my way to the door and exit the store. Just then there’s a tram stopping right across from the store. I jump into the tram, not even looking at the number. I get off at Mikhailovskaya Street and walk to Sakerdon Mikhailovich’s. In my hand a bottle of vodka, sausage links and bread.

Sakerdon Mikhailovich himself opened the doors for me. He was in a robe thrown over his bare body, in Russian boots with the tops cut off and a fur hat with ear flaps, but the earflaps were pulled up and tied in a bow on top.

“A pleasure,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich, seeing me there.

“Have I torn you away from your work?” I asked.

“No, no,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “I wasn’t doing anything, just sitting on the floor.”

“You see,” I said to Sakerdon Mikhailovich, “I’ve come to you with vodka and chasers. If you have nothing against it, let’s have a drink.”

“Very good,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “You should come in.”

We walked through to his room. I uncorked the bottle of vodka and Sakerdon Mikhailovich placed two shot glasses on the table and a plate of boiled meat.

“I’ve got some sausage links here,” said I. “So how are we going to eat them—raw, or should we boil them?”

“We’ll put them on to boil,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich, “and while they’re boiling, we’ll drink the vodka with boiled meat. It’s from a soup—excellent boiled meat!”

Sakerdon Mikhailovich placed a small pot on the kerosene stove, and we sat down to drink vodka.

“Drinking vodka is healthy,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich, filling the glasses. “Mechnikov wrote that vodka is healthier than bread and bread is just straw that rots in our stomachs.”

“Your health!” I said, clinking glasses with Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

We drank and chased it down with boiled meat.

“Tastes good,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. But at that moment something made an abrupt cracking noise in the room.

“What’s that?” I asked.

We sat silently and listened. Suddenly it cracked once more. Sakerdon Mikhailovich jumped out of his chair and, running up to the window, tore down the curtain.

“What are you doing,” I screamed.

But, without a reply, Sakerdon Mikhailovich threw himself toward the kerosene stove, grabbed the pot with the curtain and placed it on the floor.

“Damn it!” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “I forgot to pour water in the pot, and the pot’s enamel, and now the enamel’s popped off.”

“Now I get it,” I said, nodding my head.

We sat down to the table again.

“Damn them,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich, “we’ll eat the sausages raw.”

“I’m terribly hungry,” I said.

“Eat,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich, pushing the sausages towards me.

“In fact, the last time I ate was yesterday, with you, in that cellar, and since then I haven’t yet eaten anything,” I said.

“Yes, yes, yes,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“I was writing all that time,” I said.

“Damn it!” Sakerdon Mikhailovich raised his voice in an exaggerated way. “It’s such a pleasure to see a genius before me.”

“Sure it is,” I said.

“And did you unload a heap?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“Yes,” I said, “I marred an abyss of paper.”

“To the genius of our days,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich lifting his glass.

We drank. Sakerdon Mikhailovich ate the boiled meat, and I ate the sausages. Having eaten four sausages, I lit up my pipe and said:

“You know, I came to you escaping pursuit.”

“And who was pursuing you?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“A lady,” I said. But since Sakerdon Mikhailovich didn’t put any questions to me and only silently poured vodka into our glasses, I continued:

“I made her acquaintance at the bakery and fell in love straight away.”

“Good looking?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“Yes,” I said. “My type.”

We drank, and I continued:

“She agreed to go to my place to drink vodka. We stopped into a store, but I was forced to quietly slip out of the store.”

“Not enough money?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“No, I had just enough money,” I said, “but I remembered that I couldn’t let her into my room.”

“What, did you have another lady in your room?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“Yes, if you like, there is another lady in my room,” I said, smiling. “Now I can’t let anyone in my room.”

“Marry her. And you’ll have me over for dinner,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“No,” I said, snorting with laughter. “I will not marry that lady.”

“Well, then marry the other one, the one from the bakery,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“Why are you so eager to marry me off?” I said.

“And why not?” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich filling our glasses. “To your success.”

We drank. It seems the vodka was beginning to take its effect on us. Sakerdon Mikhailovich took off his fur hat with the earmuffs and tossed it onto the bed. I stood up and walked around the room already feeling slightly dizzy.

“What’s your attitude toward dead people?” I asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“Absolutely negative,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “I’m afraid of them.”

“Yeah, I can’t stand dead people either,” I said. “Were I to bump into a dead person, and if he wasn’t a relative, I’d probably kick him.”

“One shouldn’t kick dead people,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“I would give him a boot right in the muzzle,” I said. “I just can’t stand dead people and children.”

“Yeah, children are disgusting,” Sakerdon Mikhailovich agreed.

“In your opinion, what’s worse—dead people or children?” I asked.

“Children, I’d say, are worse. They get in the way more often. You have to admit, dead people don’t barge into our lives like that,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“They do barge in!” I yelled and quickly shut up.

Sakerdon Mikhailovich scrutinized me closely.

“Some more vodka?” he asked.

“No,” I said, but getting a hold of myself added, “No, thank you, I don’t want anymore.” I walk over and sit down at the table again. For some time we stay silent.

“I want to ask you a question,” I say, finally. “Do you believe in God?”

A perpendicular wrinkle appears on Sakerdon Mikhailovich’s forehead and he says:

“There exist impolite actions. It is impolite to ask a man to loan you fifty rubles if you saw that he just put two hundred in his pocket. It’s his business whether to give you the money or to decline, and the most convenient and pleasant way to decline is to lie that you have none. You’ve seen that this man has the money and thereby you have stripped him of the opportunity to simply and pleasantly decline. You have stripped him of his right to choose, and that’s rotten. It is an impolite and tactless act. And to ask a person ‘Do you believe in God?’ is also an impolite and tactless act.”

“Well,” I said, “there’s no comparison.”

“And I’m not comparing,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“Well alright,” I said, “let’s drop it. Only forgive me for asking you such an impolite and tactless question.”

“Please,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “After all, I simply declined to answer you.”

“I, too, would not have answered,” I said, “but for a different reason.”

“And what would that be?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich indifferently.

“You see,” I said, “in my opinion, there are no believers or non-believers. There are only those who want to believe and those who do not want to believe.”

“So those who do not want to believe already believe in something?” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “And those who want to believe already believe in nothing?”

“That may be,” I said. “I don’t know.”

“And what is it that they believe or do not believe in? In God?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich.

“No,” I said, “in immortality.”

“Then why did you ask me whether I believed in God?”

“Simply because to ask ‘Do you believe in immortality?’ sounds stupid somehow,” I said to Sakerdon Mikhailovich and stood up.

“Are you—leaving?” Sakerdon Mikhailovich asked me.

“Yes,” I said. “It’s time.”

“But what about the vodka?” asked Sakerdon Mikhailovich. “There’s just enough left for but a glass each.”

“Well, let’s finish it,” I said.

We drank the vodka and chased it with what was left of the boiled meat.

“And now I must go,” I said.

“Goodbye,” said Sakerdon Mikhailovich, walking me from the kitchen to the stairs. “Thank you for the refreshments.”

“I thank you,” I said. “Goodbye.”

And I went.

Left alone, Sakerdon Mikhailovich cleared the table, threw the empty vodka bottle on top of the cupboard, put his fur hat with the earflaps back on his head and sat down on the floor by the window. Sakerdon Mikhailovich laid his hands behind his back where they were not to be seen. And from underneath his hiked-up robe protruded bare bony legs shod in Russian boots with their tops cut off.

I walked down Nevsky submerged in my thoughts. I should go right away to the building super and tell him everything. And after I’ve finished with the old woman I will stand by the bakery day in and day out until I see that nice little lady. After all, I owe her 48 kopeks for the bread. I have an excellent excuse to search for her. The vodka was still having its effect and it seemed that everything was coming together nice and easy.

On the Fontanka I approached a kiosk and with the leftover change I drank a large mug of bread beer. The bread beer was bad and sour, and I walked on with a vile taste in my mouth.

On the corner of Liteinaya some drunk staggered and pushed me. It’s a good thing that I don’t have a revolver—I would have killed him right on the spot.

I must have walked all the way home with an angry scowl on my face. In any case, almost everyone I passed turned to look at me.

I walked into the building super’s office. On the desk sat a squat, dirty, pug-nosed, cross-eyed and fair-headed girl, rubbing her lips with rouge and gazing into a compact mirror.

“And where’s the super?” I asked.

The girl was silent, still rubbing her lips.

“Where’s the super?” I repeated in a sharp voice.

“Tomorrow, not today,” answered the dirty, pug-nosed, cross-eyed and fair-headed girl.

I walked out onto the street. On the opposite side walked a cripple on a mechanical leg knocking loudly with his leg and his stick. Six little boys ran after the cripple, mocking his gait.

I turned into my vestibule and started climbing the stairs. On the second floor I stopped—a disgusting thought went through my head: The old woman must have begun to decompose. I hadn’t closed the windows and they say that with open windows dead people decompose more quickly. Utter stupidity! And that damned super won’t be in till tomorrow! I stood there several minutes in indecision and climbed onward.

I stopped again at the door to my apartment. Maybe I should go down to the bakery and wait for that sweet little lady? I would plead with her to let me stay at her place for two or three nights. But then I remember that she’s already bought bread today, and that means she won’t be going to the bakery. And, anyway, nothing would come of it.

I unlocked the door and walked into the hallway. At the end of the hallway a light was on and Marya Vasilyevna, holding some sort of rag in her hand, was rubbing it with another rag. Seeing me, Marya Vasilyevna shouted:

“An owd man was wooking fow you!”

“What old man?”

“I dunno,” Marya Vasilyevna answered.

“When was it?” I asked.

“Awso dunno,” said Marya Vasilyevna.

“Was it you who talked to the old man?” I asked Marya Vasilyevna.

“I,” answered Marya Vasilyevna.

“So how is it that you don’t know when?” I said.

“Two hows o’ so ago,” said Marya Vasilyevna.

“And what did this old man look like?” I asked.

“Awso dunno,” said Marya Vasilyevna and went away into the kitchen.

I went to my room.

“And what if,” I thought, “the old woman’s vanished? I’ll walk into the room and the old woman’s gone. My God! Are there really no miracles?”

I unlocked the door and slowly pushed it ajar. Maybe I only imagined it, but the sickeningly sweet smell of decay wafted in my face. I peeked around the slightly opened door and for a moment was frozen to the spot. The old woman was on all fours slowly crawling toward me.

With a shout I slammed the door, turned the key and jumped back against the wall opposite the door.

Marya Vasilyevna appeared in the hallway.

“D’you caw fow me?” she asked.

I was shaking so bad that I couldn’t answer and only shook my head no. Marya Vasilyevna came closer.

“You wuh tawking to someone,” she said.

Again I shook my head no.

“Cwazy,” said Marya Vasilyevna and walked back into the kitchen, looking back at me several times on her way.

“Can’t stand here like this. Can’t stand here like this,” I repeated in my thoughts. The phrase came together somewhere inside me. I chanted it until it made it all the way to my consciousness.

“Yes, I can’t stand here like this,” I said to myself, but continued standing there like I was paralyzed. Something awful had happened, but ahead of me there was something that had to be done that was perhaps even more awful than what had already happened. A whirlwind spun my thoughts around in circles and I could see only the wrathful eyes of the dead old woman as she slowly crawled toward me on all fours.

Burst into the room and shatter the old woman’s skull. That’s what must be done! I even searched around with my eyes and was content upon noticing a croquet mallet that had for no known reason and for many years been standing in the corner of the hallway. Grab the mallet, burst into the room, and slam..!

The shivers had not yet passed. I stood with shoulders raised from the inner chill. My thoughts raced, got tangled, and returned to their starting point, then raced again, gaining new ground, while I stood listening intently to my thoughts and was as if standing apart from them, as if I were not their captain.

“Dead people,” my own thoughts were explaining to me, “are a no-good lot. It’s wrong to call them deceased, because they are, rather, un-deceased. They have to be watched, and carefully. Ask any watchman at the mortuary. Why do you think he’s been posted there? For one thing only—to keep watch so that the dead people don’t crawl away. There have been, in this regard, some curious cases. One dead man, while the watchman was at the public baths on executive orders, crawled out of the mortuary and into the disinfection chamber, and there he ate a bunch of linens. The sanitation crew gave him an excellent thrashing, but they had to pay for the ruined linen out of their own pockets. And another dead man crawled into the maternity ward and scared everyone to the point that one of the mothers-to-be manufactured a premature miscarriage and the dead man threw himself onto the ejected fetus and, chewing loudly, set to consuming it. And when one nurse struck the dead man on the back with a wooden stool he bit the brave nurse in the leg and she was infected with corpse poison and died soon thereafter. So, dead people—a no-good lot. You can’t let down your guard.”

“Stop!” I said to my own thoughts. “You are talking nonsense! Dead people are immobile!”

“Alright,” my own thoughts said to me, “then go in your room, where there is, as you say, an immobile dead person.”

A surprising stubbornness spoke up inside me.

“I will!” I said with confidence to my own thoughts.

“Try it!” my own thoughts mocked me.

This mockery infuriated me once and for all. I grabbed the croquet mallet and rushed to the door.

“Wait!” my own thoughts shouted to me. But I had already turned the key and thrown the door wide open.

The old woman lay by the threshold with her face to the floor.

With the croquet mallet raised, I stood at the ready. The old woman didn’t budge.

My shivers subsided, and my thoughts flowed bright and clear. I was the captain of them.

“First things first: Close the door!” I commanded myself.

I took the key out of the outer side of the door and inserted it on the inside. I did this with my left hand while in my right I held the croquet mallet and did not let the old woman out of my sight the whole time. I locked the door and, cautiously stepping over the old woman, walked out into the middle of the room.

“Now I’m going to get even with you,” I said. I had come up with a plan, the kind that murderers in crime novels and newspaper stories regularly resort to: I wanted simply to hide the old woman in a suitcase, take her outside the city and dump her in a swamp. I knew one such place.

The suitcase was under the sofa. I dragged it out and opened it. In it were various odd items: several books, an old felt hat, and torn linens. I laid all this out on the sofa.

At that moment the apartment door slammed and it seemed to me that the old woman shuddered.

Momentarily I jumped up and grabbed the croquet mallet.

The old woman is lying still. I stand there listening. It’s the engine driver come back; I hear him walking in his room. Now he’s walking down the corridor into the kitchen. It would be no good if Marya Vasilyevna tells him of my crazy behavior. Damn it all! I should walk down the hallway and calm them with my appearance.

Again I stepped over the old woman. I set the mallet down right by the door so that upon my return without even entering the room I could have the mallet in my hands, and I walked out into the hallway. Voices carried from the kitchen, but I couldn’t make out the words. I closed the door to my room part way and went cautiously to the kitchen—I wanted to know what Marya Vasilyevna and the mechanic were talking about. I walked quickly down the hallway but slowed my pace as I got nearer the kitchen. The mechanic was talking; it seemed he was speaking of something that happened to him at work.

I walked in. The mechanic stood talking with a towel in his hands and Marya Vasilyevna sat listening on a stool. Catching sight of me, the mechanic waved.

“Hello, hello, Matvei Philipovich,” I said to him as I passed on my way to the bathroom. So far everything was calm. Marya Vasilyevna had gotten used to my peculiarities and might already have forgotten this most recent case.

Suddenly it occurred to me: I didn’t lock the door. And what if the old woman crawls out of the room?

I rushed back, but caught myself in time and, in order not to scare the tenants, I walked through the kitchen at an even pace.

Marya Vasilyevna was knocking on the kitchen table with her finger, saying to the mechanic:

“Excewent! Now that’s excewent! I would’ve whistwed too!”

My heart froze as I walked out into the hallway and, now almost running, went off to my room.

Outside everything was calm. I walked up to the door and opened it just enough to look inside. The old woman was lying calmly as before with her face to the floor. The croquet mallet stood by the door where I’d left it. I took it, walked into the room and locked the door behind me. The room certainly smelled of a corpse. I stepped over the old woman, walked over to the window and sat down in the armchair. I hope this odor, still faint but already unbearable, doesn’t make me sick. I lit my pipe. I felt nauseous and there was a slight pain in my stomach.

What am I sitting here for? I need to act, quickly, before this old woman goes completely rancid. In any case, she must be stuffed into the suitcase with caution, because that’s exactly the moment she could bite my finger. And then to die of an infection from a corpse—no thank you!

“Aha!” I suddenly exclaimed. “I’m quite interested—what will you bite me with? Aren’t those your little teeth way over there!”

I bent over in the armchair and looked into the corner on the far side of the window, where, by my calculations, the old woman’s false teeth should have been. But the false teeth were not there.

I wondered: Maybe the old woman was crawling around my room looking for her teeth? And maybe she even found them and put them back in her mouth?

I took the croquet mallet and used it to poke around in the corner. No, the dentures were gone. Then I took a heavy flannel sheet from a drawer and walked over to the old woman. I held the croquet mallet in my right hand at the ready, and in my left hand I held the flannel sheet.

The dead old woman aroused in me a mixture of squeamishness and fear. I lifted up her head with the mallet—her mouth was open, her eyes rolled upwards, a large dark stain spread across the whole of her chin where I had kicked her with my boot. I looked into the old woman’s mouth—no, she had not found her false teeth. I let go of her head. It dropped and banged against the floor.

I spread the flannel sheet across the floor and pulled it right up to the old woman. Then with my foot and the croquet mallet I turned the old woman over to her left and onto her back. Now the old woman was lying on the sheet. The old woman’s legs were bent at the knees and her fists pressed against her shoulders. It seemed that the old woman, lying on her back like a cat, was getting ready to defend herself against an eagle that was attacking her. Quickly, be gone with this carrion!

I wrapped the old woman in the thick sheet and lifted her into my arms. She turned out to be lighter than I thought. I let her down into the suitcase and tried closing the lid. Here I expected some difficulties, but the lid closed with relative ease. I snapped in the locks of the suitcase and straightened up.

The suitcase stood before me looking perfectly respectable as if inside it were books and linens. I took it by the handle and tried lifting it. It was, of course, heavy, but not too much so—I could no doubt carry it to the tram.

I looked at my watch: twenty past five. That’s good. I sat down in the armchair to have a rest and finish smoking my pipe.

The sausages that I ate today were definitely not so good, because my stomach ached more and more. And maybe it was because I ate them raw? Yet again, maybe my stomach ache was purely my nerves.

I sit and smoke. And minute after minute goes by.

The spring sun shines in the window and I squint from its rays. Now it hides behind the chimney of the apartment house standing opposite, and the shadow cast by the chimney runs along the roof then flies across the street and falls across my face. I recall how yesterday at this exact time I sat writing my story. Here it is—the graph paper, and an inscription made in a fine hand: “The miracle worker was tall.”

I looked out the window. A cripple walked down the street on a mechanical leg knocking loudly with his leg and his stick. Two workers and with them an old woman guffawed, holding their sides, at the cripple’s funny gait.

I stood up. It’s time! Time to be on my way! Time to take the old woman to the swamp! I also need to borrow money from the train engineer.

I went out into the hallway and walked up to his door.

“Matvei Philipovich, are you at home?” I asked.

“I’m home,” answered the engineer.

“Then, forgive me, Matvei Philipovich, are you not flush with money? I’ll be paid the day after tomorrow. You wouldn’t be able to lend me thirty rubles, would you?”

“I would,” said the mechanic. And I could hear his keys clanging as he unlocked some kind of box. Then he opened the door and stretched out a new thirty-ruble bill.

“Many thanks, Matvei Philipovich,” I said.

“It’s nothing, it’s nothing,” said the mechanic.

I shoved the money in my pocket and returned to my room. The suitcase stood serenely in the same place.

“Well, now to get on my way, with haste,” I said to myself.

I took the suitcase and walked out of the room.

Marya Vasilyevna saw me with the suitcase and shouted:

“Where to?”

“My aunt’s place,” I said.

“You be gone wong?” asked Marya Vasilyevna.

“No,” I said. “I just need to bring some things to my aunt’s. I’ll be back, maybe even tonight.”

I went out into the street. I got to the tram without a hitch, carrying the suitcase now in my right hand, now in my left.

I climbed into the tram from the front landing of the last car and started waving to the conductor so that she’d come over and receive payment for the luggage and the ticket. I didn’t want to pass along my only thirty-ruble bill through the whole tram, and I couldn’t bring myself to leave the suitcase and go to the conductor myself. The conductor came over to me at the landing and announced that she didn’t have change. I was forced to get off at the very first stop.

I stood there stewing and waited for the next tram. My stomach ached and my legs faintly quivered.

And suddenly I saw my sweet little lady—she was crossing the street, not looking in my direction.

I grabbed the suitcase and ran after her. I didn’t know her name so I couldn’t call out to her. The suitcase was a terrible hindrance—I held it in front of me with both hands, pushing it forward with my knees and stomach. The sweet little lady walked quite quickly and I had a feeling that I wouldn’t be able to catch up to her. I was drenched with sweat and exhaustion. The sweet little lady turned into an alleyway. When I made it to the corner she was nowhere to be seen.

“Damn old woman!” I hissed, throwing the suitcase on the ground.

The sleeves of my jacket were soaked through with sweat and clung to my arms. I sat down on the suitcase and, taking out a handkerchief, wiped my neck and face. Two boys stopped in front of me and began looking me over. I made a calm face and gazed intently at the nearest gateway as if I were waiting for someone. The boys whispered to each other and pointed their fingers at me. Wild malice choked me. Oh, that I could afflict tetanus on them all!

And all because of these lousy kids I get up, lift the suitcase, walk over to the gateway and peer inside. I make a surprised face, get out my watch and shrug my shoulders. The boys watch me from afar. Again I shrug my shoulders and look into the gateway. “How strange,” I say out loud. I take the suitcase and drag it to the tram stop.

I arrive at the train station at five to seven. I get a round trip ticket to Foxes Nose and board the train.

Apart from myself in the train car there are two people. One of them is clearly a worker—he’s tired, with his cap pulled over his eyes he’s gone to sleep. The other one, still a young man, is dressed like a village dandy: He’s got a pink Russian collar shirt under his sports coat and a curly tuft of hair sticks out from under his cap. He’s smoking a cigarette stuck in a bright-green plastic cigarette holder.

I put the suitcase between the benches and take a seat. I’ve got such spasms in my stomach that I clench my fists to avoid howling from the pain.

On the platform two policemen lead a civilian to the police station. He walks with his hands behind his back and his head down.

The train starts to move. I look at my watch—ten minutes past eight.

What a pleasure it will be to dump this old woman in the swamp! Pity I forgot to take a stick with me as the old woman might need a push.

The dandy with the pink collar shirt eyes me insolently. I turn my back to him and look out the window.

Terrible pangs attack my stomach—I clench my teeth and my fists and tense my legs.

We pass Lanskaya and New Village. There’s the golden top of the Buddhist pagoda, shining, and a glimpse of the sea.

But now I jump up and, forgetting everything around me, run in short steps to the bathroom. A dreadful wave sways and spins my consciousness …

The train slows its pace. We are approaching Lakhta. I sit still, trying not to move so that they don’t chase me out of the bathroom at the stop.

“Why won’t it hurry up and move! Hurry up and move!”

The train jerks to a start and I close my eyes in blissful pleasure. Oh, these minutes can be as sweet as moments of love! All my powers are in play; but I know that a frightening decline will follow.

The train stops again. It’s Olgino. And again this torture!

But now these are false urges. A cold sweat emerges on my forehead and a slight chill flutters around my heart. I get up and stand there for some time with my head pressed against the wall. The train is moving and the rocking of the train car is very pleasant.

I gather all my strength and stagger out of the bathroom.

The train car is empty. The worker and the dandy in the pink shirt must have gotten off at Lakhta or Olgino. Slowly, I walk over to my window.

And suddenly I stop and look ahead with a dull stare. The suitcase is no longer there where I left it. I must have mistaken the window. I jump to the next window. No suitcase. I jump backward and forward, I run the length of the car in both directions, looking under the bench seats, but the suitcase is nowhere to be found.

There’s no doubt about it. Of course, while I was in the bathroom, the suitcase was stolen. That could have been foreseen!

I sit on the bench, my eyes bulging, and for some reason I remember how the enamel cracked, popping off the burning hot pan at Sakerdon Mikhailovich’s.

“What’s happened?” I ask myself. “Now who’ll believe me that I didn’t murder the old woman? I’ll be apprehended this very day, here, or in the city at the train station, like that civilian walking with his head down.”

I walk out onto the landing of the train car. The train is approaching Foxes Nose. The white posts that border the road are flashing by. The train slows to a stop. The steps of my train car don’t reach the ground. I jump down and walk to the station house. There’s another half-hour before the train back to the city.

I walk into a little wood. There are some short mulberry bushes—nobody will see me behind them. I set out in their direction.

A large green caterpillar crawls along the ground. I get down on my knees and touch it with my fingers. It folds up its strong, sinewy body in one direction and then the other.

I look around. No one can see me. A light shudder runs up my back.

I bow my head low and quietly speak:

“In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and forever. Amen.” …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. .

At this point I temporarily end my manuscript in the belief that it has drawn on long enough.


End of May and first half of June, 1939